# Daily-Texan-Operations
Questions? Contact mileshutson@utexas.edu (214) 929-5684

Over the semester of Spring 2015, the Daily Texan's Digital Projects student manager (me) made a concerted effort to demonstrate a more sustainable model for developing the student newspaper's website and interactive features. This method involved making applications and the website as modular and self-contained as possible. Given that staff turns over every 4 months for the Daily Texan, development is very difficult. However, if knowledge is transferred more effectively between student developers, there can be an agreed upon system for building interactives and the website, and problems that have been encountered by the Daily Texan website (and TSM more broadly) for the last 4 years running can be averted. 

This github organization, The-Daily-Texan, represents an attempt to "pass the baton" and maintain continuity for the Daily Texan. At the end of the day, it's your job to maintain a workable system by building off of my work (and whoever follows me) in a sustainable manager. In this (open to the community) repository, Daily-Texan-Operations, I will detail how.

# Good Development Practices
I know this term tends to put college-age programmers to sleep. But before you program anything new for the Daily Texan, please take a look at the Drupal site in our bitbucket repository. If you cannot understand why someone would possibly do some of the things that have been done to our current website, understand that perfectly capable people have worked on our Drupal site. You can do just as poorly as they have. The difference between leaving work that those who will follow you on can build on and that they will curse you for will lie in the following:
* Documentation - I'm not mind reader, and you probably aren't either. Since we all can agree on our mutual inability to read minds, leave behind your own markdown documents in Daily-Texan-Operations, in your project repositories, and everywhere else, documenting what you did. Beyond that, document your intent. Why did you do this? Is it part of an unfinished project you hope someone else will pick up on?
* Understanding - If you don't understand a Daily Texan system, please just don't start building things on top of it. Take the time, even if it is a month, to actually come to an understanding of what is going on. You may make things work, but I guarantee you will leave a mess for someone else to clean up. If you don't have the background to make a project happen, don't try unless you can get that background.
* Consistency - This semester, I built a server backend that is as flexible as that used by Pinterest and The Onion. I know that because it is built on the same framework that they build on: Django. There is nothing that you want to make for the Daily Texan that cannot run on Django. It may not be your favorite framework. You may not have heard of it before. But please think twice before you try to move elsewhere. If you start with what people before you have done, and take care to follow Django development guidelines (read the online documentation!), then you will create something that can be maintained and built on, rather than discarded once you're gone and no one can understand what you've done. Additionally, you can copy your Django app to your own server when you move on from the Daily Texan, guaranteeing that you have a portfolio piece, even if the Daily Texan later mothballs your project. 

# Daily Texan Modus Operandi
With that in mind, let's move on to the method of operation that was established this semester. I quickly found that we have two different types of projects: 
1. Those that need a database
2. Those that don't.

If at all possible, you should avoid using a database for your project. Databases require maintenance. They need backups. They're complicated and generally you use an ORM (like Django) to interface with them. They become a liability. Lots of things that you might want to make using a database can actually be made by serving a site with a more minimalistic framework like Flask, and then crawling it and saving it into a set of static html, css, javascript, and json files. You can see several examples of that in this github organization. I was a fan of using NPR's copytext (there's a version that I enhanced in this repo for your convenience), Frozen-Flask, and Flask. You are under no obligation to do anything resembling what I did. The nice thing about making a product where the end result is flat files is that it does not matter how you make it. Static files can be served out of any server, on any url, and even when no one understands how they were first made anymore, they can live on. This is why major outlets, including NPR, whose workflow I modeled after, look to build as many projects as possible under this model. Signs that a project is a good candidate to be baked out via flatfiles rather than served by a framework and database include:
* The project will not change after a certain period of time
* The frontend has a limited number of possibilities: For example, our student government explorer had about 100 candidates. We could simply write a program to take a spreadsheets with their details, download all their images, and make a frontpage and 100 something candidate pages. From there, we could simply place those on the apache server our main site runs on (they're now on the interactives server, a move that was easy for the reasons mentioned above) without any truoble.
* You want to embed it in an article: If you want to embed it, try as much as possible to make it static. Then you can simply copy paste into the CMS.

Sometimes, however, a database is inevitable. Our crime interactive and photo map are examples of this. If you want an administrative interface for your interactive, or it has hundreds of thousands of possible interactions, then sometimes it needs a framework and a database behind it. We made a Django site for this purpose (interactives-backend), and it powers some interactives on the subdomain interactives.dailytexanonline.com . If you decide to do a project requiring a database, I highly encourage you to build a Django app to plug into the existing Django solution. Read the django docs and follow standards and everything should turn out just fine. Never experiment live on the production server. If you for some reason can't run Django with a test SQLite3 database file on your computer, then rent a $5 or $10/month instance on Digital Ocean and do it there. Digital Ocean only charges by the hour, so there's no excuse to develop using the production server.

# Fin
I can't possibly document all of the technical details of our site in the time I have. Go to Curt for credentials and security secrets about the site. Make sure you never post those on github. If you can't figure out th Django site or a project you want to model your own work after or build on, then read more learning material first. If that doesn't work, contact mileshutson@utexas.edu . You will learn about how to work with the provider for our main site as you go. ITS will always move more slowly and clumsily than you want, and I would advise not leaving your ambitions in their hands. There is a reason that the Dreamhost server for interactive features exists. In the long term, it is the goal of TSM to have a better framework for serving their own sites. The Django site exists as a proof of concept that our site can and should be able to serve its audience faster and for far less resources. You are not obliged to develop an entire working Django Daily Texan site for TSM. The migrations from Drupal alone would take a full-timer a week or two. That is the job of a developer working full time. But you can build cool things on Django, boost your portfolio, get traffic for the Daily Texan, and maybe eventually convince people that there's a better way. Good luck! Working at the Daily Texan for a developer is interesting, very few people will understand what you're doing and you will largely be left to decide your own agenda. This is both a challenge and a wonderful opportunity.
